System assignments visibility of configuration state channels (#49)
uyuni-project/uyuni-rfc: accepted/00076-state-channels-visibility.md

- Feature Name: Enhance visibility of connected State Channels
- Start Date: 2020-12-17
- RFC PR:

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Provide visibility of **inherited** State Channels connections at a System Details level. The reverse information as well should be provided by giving visibility of those systems they are connected (directly or by **inheritance**) to a certain State Channel at a Channel Details level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide better visibility, in the UI, of the relationships between State Channels, System Groups, Organizations and Systems - especially indirect ones.

The goal is to clarify which system **inherits** which State Channels, and why - and conversely, which State Channel are ultimately associated to which Groups, Organizations and Systems.
```

*Note: everything discussed in this RFC applies to Salt clients only. Traditional clients do not inherit State Channels.*

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## Why are we doing this?

> By definition a State Channel is a pool of salt states resources. Once a channel of this type is created, it is possible to subscribe systems to it in order to apply the content of that channel to them. Alternatively, channels can also be assigned to System Groups and/or to Organizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By definition a State Channel is a pool of Salt states. Once a channel of this type is created, it is possible to subscribe systems to it in order to apply the content of that channel to them. Alternatively, channels can also be assigned to System Groups and/or to Organizations.
```

  - G3 --> C6
7. add the System S1 to System Groups G2 and G3
8. go to System Detail > States > Configuration Channels > System
9. still only the C3 channel is listed as an assignment to S1, but in reality S1 is inheriting C2 from G1, C4 and C5 from G2 and C6 from G3

## What is the expected outcome?

A transparent representation of all State Channels assigned to a system from all the possible sources: direct and inherited (from System Groups, from Organization and from the system registration).

## Limitation

It turns out that once the Salt States are collected from the various source States Channels, they are handled by the Salt engine itself which builds up the Salt highstate, and this one has no tracking information of the order or the source of the states origin.

The proposed solution of this RFC is not including an end-to-end description of where each single Salt State comes from where at the moment, the initial improvement is to add the visibility of the set of State Channels every system inherits from other entities (System Groups and Organizations as described before).

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### `Home > My Organization > Configuration Channels`

> This page represents the assignment connection between an organization and both configuration channels and state channels. All the systems in this organization will inherit the selection set of channels here. This should be only a list of Configuration Channels and State Channels with the possibility of simply select/deselect channels and Apply changes. If there is a need to show only the channel selected, a filter to the list page should be added instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page presents associations between an organization and both Configuration Channels and State Channels. All systems in this organization will inherit Channels selected here. This is a list of Configuration Channels and State Channels with the possibility of selecting/deselecting channels and Applying any changes.

Proposal is to add a filter to the list page for convenience.
```

Before:
![My Organization BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Home_MyOrganization_ConfigurationChannels_BEFORE.png)

After:
![My Organization AFTER](images/state-channels-visibility/Home_MyOrganization_ConfigurationChannels_AFTER.png)

### `Systems > Details > States > Highstate`
Before:
![System Details Highstate BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_Details_States_Highstate_BEFORE.png)

After:
![System Details Highstate AFTER](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_Details_States_Highstate_AFTER.png)

### `Systems > Details > States > Configuration Channels`
Before:
![System Details BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_Details_States_ConfigurationChannels_BEFORE.png)

After:
![System Details AFTER 1](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_Details_States_ConfigurationChannels_AFTER_1.png)
![System Details AFTER 2](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_Details_States_ConfigurationChannels_AFTER_2.png)

### `Systems > System Groups > Details > States > Configuration Channels`

> This page represents the assignment connection between a system group and state channels. All the systems in this system group will inherit the selection set of channels here. This should be only a list of State Channels with the possibility of simply select/deselect channels and Apply changes. If there is a need to show only the channel selected, a filter to the list page should be added instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page presents associations between a system group and State Channels. All systems in this system group will inherit the selected set of channels.

Proposal is to add a filter to the list page for convenience.
```

Before:
![SSM Unsubscribe From Channels BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_SSM_Configuration_UnsubscribeFromChannels_BEFORE.png)

After:
![SSM Unsubscribe From Channels AFTER](images/state-channels-visibility/Systems_SSM_Configuration_UnsubscribeFromChannels_AFTER.png)

### `Configuration > Overview`
Before:
![Configuration Overview BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Configuration_Overview_BEFORE.png)

After:
![Configuration Overview AFTER](images/state-channels-visibility/Configuration_Overview_AFTER.png)

### `Configuration > Channels`
Before:
![Configuration Channels BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Configuration_Channels_BEFORE.png)

After:
![Configuration Channels AFTER](images/state-channels-visibility/Configuration_Channels_AFTER.png)

### `Configuration > Channels > Details > Overview`
Before:
![Configuration Channels Detail Overview BEFORE](images/state-channels-visibility/Configuration_Channels_Details_Overview_BEFORE.png)

After:
![Configuration Channels Detail Overview AFTER](images/state-channels-visibility/Configuration_Channels_Details_Overview_AFTER.png)

> ### `Configuration > Channels > Details > Systems > Inheriting Systems`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `Configuration > Channels > Details > Systems > Inherited Systems`
```

Please check with native English speakers if "inherited" is a good term here - we might want to prefer "indirectly assigned" or something similar. I just do not feel qualified enough to be authoritative.

> This is a **new** page where systems are listed only if not subscribed to the channel directly, but inheriting it through Organization or System Group assignment. The list will contain two columns: one for the system name and one for the source the system got the channel inherited from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a **new** page where systems are listed only if not subscribed to a given channel directly, but inheriting it through an Organization or System Group assignment. The list will contain two columns: one for the system name and one for the source the system got the channel inherited from.
```

The concrete drawback is: the solution is adding information to a tech-debt affected architecture, spreading the same information in many places (see how many pages/screenshots). Maintaining should not be complicated, but future refactoring of the feature workflow could be more difficult.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

## What other designs/options have been considered?

Without investigating deeply, the alternative would be redesigning the feature completely from both the design and technical perspectives: the technical refactoring should get rid of the struts stack and redefine the concept of Configuration Channel and State Channel used by traditional or salt minion clients. By addressing the technical part, also the workflow could be re-drawn, dropping some pages and instead of adding separated tabs of tables it would be preferrable to have unified modern lists of filterable entries. The drawback of this alternative is that it would take much longer (from 3 to 5 times roughly) than the proposed official solution.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

## What are the unknowns?

> 1. Salt States coming from Formulas are not yet considered as part of this RFC

Reviewer: At this point, this is not an unknown, it should rather be presented as a known limitation of the proposed approach.

> 2. This RFC is considering presenting all the sources of the Salt States for a given system. The RFC is **not** considering instead to implement a reverse-engineering to pick every Salt State from a given HighState and build the history of the specific source where it came from. This RFC is also **not** about tracing each line in the highstate to one of the states assigned to a system directly and/or indirectly from their sources.

Reviewer: In my understanding this is covered by the "Limitation" paragraph above and could be removed.
